<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="prologue">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Who Mocquet Was, and How This Tale Became Known to the Narrator</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="prologue-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Why, I ask myself, during those first twenty years of my literary life, from 1827 to 1847, did I so rarely turn my eyes and thoughts towards the little town where I was born, towards the woods amid which it lies embowered, and the villages that cluster round it? How was it that during all that time the world of my youth seemed to me to have disappeared, as if hidden behind a cloud, whilst the future which lay before me shone clear and resplendent, like those magic islands which Columbus and his companions mistook for baskets of flowers floating on the sea?</p>
				<p>Alas! simply because during the first twenty years of our life, we have Hope for our guide, and during the last twenty, Reality.</p>
				<p>From the hour when, weary with our journey, we ungird ourselves, and dropping the traveller’s staff, sit down by the wayside, we begin to look back over the road that we have traversed; for it is the way ahead that now is dark and misty, and so we turn and gaze into the depths of the past.</p>
				<p>Then with the wide desert awaiting us in front, we are astonished, as we look along the path which we have left behind, to catch sight of first one and then another of those delicious oases of verdure and shade, beside which we never thought of lingering for a moment, and which, indeed we had passed by almost without notice.</p>
				<p>But, then, how quickly our feet carried us along in those days! we were in such a hurry to reach that goal of happiness, to which no road has ever yet brought any one of us.</p>
				<p>It is at this point that we begin to see how blind and ungrateful we have been; it is now that we say to ourselves, if we could but once more come across such a green and wooded resting-place, we would stay there for the rest of our lives, would pitch our tent there, and there end our days.</p>
				<p>But the body cannot go back and renew its existence, and so memory has to make its pious pilgrimage alone; back to the early days and fresh beginnings of life it travels, like those light vessels that are borne upward by their white sails against the current of a river. Then the body once more pursues its journey; but the body without memory is as the night without stars, as the lamp without its flame.⁠ ⁠… And so body and memory go their several ways.</p>
				<p>The body, with chance for its guide, moves towards the unknown.</p>
				<p>Memory, that bright will-o’-the-wisp, hovers over the landmarks that are left behind; and memory, we may be sure, will not lose her way. Every oasis is revisited, every association recalled, and then with a rapid flight she returns to the body that grows ever more and more weary, and like the humming of a bee, like the song of a bird, like the murmur of a stream, tells the tale of all that she has seen.</p>
				<p>And as the tired traveller listens, his eyes grow bright again, his mouth smiles, and a light steals over his face. For Providence in kindness, seeing that he cannot return to youth, allows youth to return to him. And ever after he loves to repeat aloud what memory tells him in her soft, low voice.</p>
				<p>And is our life, then, bounded by a circle like the earth? Do we, unconsciously, continue to walk towards the spot from which we started? And as we travel nearer and nearer to the grave, do we again draw closer, ever closer, to the cradle?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>I cannot say. But what happened to myself, that much at any rate I know. At my first halt along the road of life, my first glance backwards, I began by relating the tale of Bernard and his uncle Berthelin, then the story of Ange Pitou, his fair fiancée, and of Aunt Angélique; after that I told of Conscience and Mariette; and lastly of Catherine Blum and Father Vatrin.</p>
				<p>I am now going to tell you the story of Thibault and his wolves, and of the Lord of Vez. And how, you will ask, did I become acquainted with the events which I am now about to bring before you? I will tell you.</p>
				<p>Have you read my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires</i>, and do you remember one, by name Mocquet, who was a friend of my father’s?</p>
				<p>If you have read them, you will have some vague recollection of this personage. If you have not read them, you will not remember anything about him at all.</p>
				<p>In either case, then, it is of the first importance that I should bring Mocquet clearly before your mind’s eye.</p>
				<p>As far back as I can remember, that is when I was about three years of age, we lived, my father and mother and I, in a little Château called Les Fossés, situated on the boundary that separates the departments of Aisne and Oise, between Haramont and Longpré. The little house in question had doubtless been named Les Fossés on account of the deep and broad moat, filled with water, with which it was surrounded.</p>
				<p>I do not mention my sister, for she was at school in Paris, and we only saw her once a year, when she was home for a month’s holiday.</p>
				<p>The household, apart from my father, mother and myself, consisted⁠—firstly: of a large black dog, called Truffe, who was a privileged animal and made welcome wherever he appeared, more especially as I regularly went about on his back; secondly: of a gardener, named Pierre, who kept me amply provided with frogs and snakes, two species of living creatures in which I was particularly interested; thirdly: of a negro, a valet of my father’s, named Hippolyte, a sort of black merry-andrew, whom my father, I believe, only kept that he might be well primed with anecdotes wherewith to gain the advantage in his encounters with Brunel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and beat his wonderful stories; fourthly: of a keeper named Mocquet, for whom I had a great admiration, seeing that he had magnificent stories to tell of ghosts and werewolves, to which I listened every evening, and which were abruptly broken off the instant the General⁠—as my father was usually called⁠—appeared on the scene; fifthly: of a cook, who answered to the name of Marie, but this figure I can no longer recall, it is lost to me in the misty twilight of life; I remember only the name, as given to someone of whom but a shadowy outline remains in my memory, and about whom, as far as I recollect, there was nothing of a very poetic character.</p>
				<p>Mocquet, however, is the only person that need occupy our attention for the present. Let me try to make him known to you, both as regards his personal appearance and his character.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Mocquet was a man of about forty years of age, short, thickset, broad of shoulder, and sturdy of leg. His skin was burnt brown by the sun, his eyes were small and piercing, his hair grizzled, and his black whiskers met under his chin in a half circle.</p>
				<p>As I look back, his figure rises before me, wearing a three-cornered hat, and clad in a green waistcoat with silver buttons, velveteen cord breeches, and high leathern gaiters, with a game-bag over his shoulder, his gun in his hand, and a cutty-pipe in his mouth.</p>
				<p>Let us pause for a moment to consider this pipe, for this pipe grew to be, not merely an accessory, but an integral part of Mocquet. Nobody could remember ever having seen Mocquet without it. If by any chance Mocquet did not happen to have it in his mouth, he had it in his hand.</p>
				<p>This pipe, having to accompany Mocquet into the heart of the thickest coverts, it was necessary that it should be of such a kind as to offer the least possible opportunity to any other solid body of bringing about its destruction; for the destruction of his old, well-coloured cutty would have been to Mocquet a loss that years alone could have repaired. Therefore the stem of Mocquet’s pipe was not more than half-an-inch long; moreover you might always wager that half that half inch at least was supplied by the quill of a feather.</p>
				<p>This habit of never being without his pipe, which, by causing the almost entire disappearance of both canines, had hollowed out a sort of vice for itself on the left side of his mouth, between the fourth incisor and the first molar, had given rise to another of Mocquet’s habits; this was to speak with his teeth clenched, whereby a certain impression of obstinacy was conveyed by all he said.⁠—This became even more marked if Mocquet chanced at any moment to take his pipe out of his mouth, for there was nothing then to prevent the jaws closing and the teeth coming together in a way which prevented the words passing through them at all except in a sort of whistle, which was hardly intelligible.</p>
				<p>Such was Mocquet with respect to outward appearance. In the following pages I will endeavour to give some idea of his intellectual capacity and moral qualities.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Early one morning, before my father had risen, Mocquet walked into his room, and planted himself at the foot of the bed, stiff and upright as a signpost.</p>
				<p>“Well, Mocquet,” said my father, “what’s the matter now? what gives me the pleasure of seeing you here at this early hour?”</p>
				<p>“The matter is, General,” replied Mocquet with the utmost gravity, “the matter is that I am <em>nightmared</em>.”</p>
				<p>Mocquet had, quite unawares to himself, enriched the language with a double verb, both active and passive.</p>
				<p>“You are <em>nightmared</em>?” responded my father, raising himself on his elbow. “Dear, dear, that’s a serious matter, my poor Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“You are right there, General.”</p>
				<p>And Mocquet took his pipe out of his mouth, a thing he did rarely, and only on the most important occasions.</p>
				<p>“And how long have you been <em>nightmared</em>?” continued my father compassionately.</p>
				<p>“For a whole week, General.”</p>
				<p>“And who by, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Ah! I know very well who by,” answered Mocquet, through his teeth, which were so much the more tightly closed that his pipe was in his hand, and his hand behind his back.</p>
				<p>“And may I also know by whom?”</p>
				<p>“By Mother Durand, of Haramont, who, as you will have heard, is an old witch.”</p>
				<p>“No, indeed, I assure you I had no idea of such a thing.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! but I know it well enough; I’ve seen her riding past on her broomstick to her Witches’ Sabbath.”</p>
				<p>“You have seen her go by on her broomstick?”</p>
				<p>“As plainly as I see you, General; and more than that, she has an old black billy-goat at home that she worships.”</p>
				<p>“And why should she come and nightmare you?”</p>
				<p>“To revenge herself on me, because I came upon her once at midnight on the heath of Gondreville, when she was dancing round and round in her devil’s circle.”</p>
				<p>“This is a most serious accusation which you bring against her, my friend; and before repeating to anyone what you have been telling me in private, I think it would be as well if you tried to collect some more proofs.”</p>
				<p>“Proofs! What more proofs do I want! Does not every soul in the village know that in her youth she was the Mistress of Thibault, the wolf-leader?”</p>
				<p>“Indeed! I must look carefully into this matter, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“I am looking very carefully into it myself, and she shall pay for it, the old mole!”</p>
				<p><em>Old mole</em> was an expression that Mocquet had borrowed from his friend Pierre, the gardener, who, as he had no worse enemies to deal with than moles, gave the name of mole to everything and everybody that he particularly detested.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>“I must look carefully into this matter”⁠—these words were not said by my father by reason of any belief he had in the truth of Mocquet’s tale about his nightmare; and even the fact of the nightmare being admitted by him, he gave no credence to the idea that it was Mother Durand who had <em>nightmared</em> the keeper. Far from it; but my father was not ignorant of the superstitions of the people, and he knew that belief in spells was still widespread among the peasantry in the country districts. He had heard of terrible acts of revenge carried out by the victims on some man or woman who they thought had bewitched them, in the belief that the charm would thus be broken; and Mocquet, while he stood denouncing Mother Durand to my father, had had such an accent of menace in his voice, and had given such a grip to his gun, that my father thought it wise to appear to agree with everything he said, in order to gain his confidence and so prevent him doing anything without first consulting him.</p>
				<p>So, thinking that he had so far gained an influence over Mocquet, my father ventured to say:</p>
				<p>“But before you make her pay for it, my good Mocquet, you ought to be quite sure that no one can cure you of your nightmare.”</p>
				<p>“No one can cure me, General,” replied Mocquet in a tone of conviction.</p>
				<p>“How! No one able to cure you?”</p>
				<p>“No one; I have tried the impossible.”</p>
				<p>“And how did you try?”</p>
				<p>“First of all, I drank a large bowl of hot wine before going to bed.”</p>
				<p>“And who recommended that remedy? was it Monsieur Lécosse?” Monsieur Lécosse was the doctor in repute at Villers-Cotterets.</p>
				<p>“Monsieur Lécosse?” exclaimed Mocquet. “No, indeed! What should he know about spells! By my faith, no! it was not Monsieur Lécosse.”</p>
				<p>“Who was it, then?”</p>
				<p>“It was the shepherd of Longpré.”</p>
				<p>“But a bowl of wine, you dunderhead! Why, you must have been dead drunk.”</p>
				<p>“The shepherd drank half of it.”</p>
				<p>“I see; now I understand why he prescribed it. And did the bowl of wine have any effect?”</p>
				<p>“Not any, General; she came trampling over my chest that night, just as if I had taken nothing.”</p>
				<p>“And what did you do next? You were not obliged, I suppose, to limit your efforts to your bowl of hot wine?”</p>
				<p>“I did what I do when I want to catch a <em>wily beast</em>.”</p>
				<p>Mocquet made use of a phraseology which was all his own; no one had ever succeeded in inducing him to say a <em>wild beast</em>; every time my father said <em>wild beast</em>, Mocquet would answer, “Yes, General, I know, a <em>wily beast</em>.”</p>
				<p>“You still stick to your <em>wily beast</em>, then?” my father said to him on one occasion.</p>
				<p>“Yes, General, but not out of obstinacy.”</p>
				<p>“And why then, may I ask?”</p>
				<p>“Because, General, with all due respect to you, you are mistaken about it.”</p>
				<p>“Mistaken? I? How?”</p>
				<p>“Because you ought not to say a <em>wild beast</em>, but a <em>wily beast</em>.”</p>
				<p>“And what is a <em>wily beast</em>, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“It is an animal that only goes about at night; that is, an animal that creeps into the pigeon-houses and kills the pigeons, like the polecat, or into the chicken-houses, to kill the chickens, like the fox; or into the folds, to kill the sheep, like the wolf; it means an animal which is cunning and deceitful, in short, a <em>wily beast</em>.”</p>
				<p>It was impossible to find anything to say after such a logical definition as this.⁠—My father, therefore, remained silent, and Mocquet, feeling that he had gained a victory, continued to call <em>wild beasts</em>, <em>wily beasts</em>, utterly unable to understand my father’s obstinacy in continuing to call <em>wily beasts</em>, <em>wild beasts</em>.</p>
				<p>So now you understand why, when my father asked him what else he had done, Mocquet answered, “I did what I do when I want to catch a <em>wily beast</em>.”</p>
				<p>We have interrupted the conversation to give this explanation; but as there was no need of explanation between my father and Mocquet, they had gone on talking, you must understand, without any such break.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>“And what is it you do, Mocquet, when you want to catch this animal of yours?” asked my father.</p>
				<p>“I set a <em>trarp</em>, General.” Mocquet always called a trap a trarp.</p>
				<p>“Do you mean to tell me you have set a trap to catch Mother Durand?”</p>
				<p>My father had of course said <em>trap</em>; but Mocquet did not like anyone to pronounce words differently from himself, so he went on:</p>
				<p>“Just so, General; I have set a <em>trarp</em> for Mother Durand.”</p>
				<p>“And where have you put your <em>trarp</em>? Outside your door?”</p>
				<p>My father, you see, was willing to make concessions.</p>
				<p>“Outside my door! Much good that would be! I only know she gets into my room, but I cannot even guess which way she comes.”</p>
				<p>“Down the chimney, perhaps?”</p>
				<p>“There is no chimney, and besides, I never see her until I feel her.”</p>
				<p>“And you do see her, then?”</p>
				<p>“As plainly I see you, General.”</p>
				<p>“And what does she do?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing agreeable, you may be sure; she tramples all over my chest: thud, thud! thump, thump!”</p>
				<p>“Well, where <em>have</em> you set your trap, then?”</p>
				<p>“The <em>trarp</em>, why, I put it on my own stomach.”</p>
				<p>“And what kind of a <em>trarp</em> did you use?”</p>
				<p>“Oh! a first-rate <em>trarp</em>!”</p>
				<p>“What was it?”</p>
				<p>“The one I made to catch the grey wolf with, that used to kill <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Destournelles’ sheep.”</p>
				<p>“Not such a first-rate one, then, for the grey wolf ate up your bait, and then bolted.”</p>
				<p>“You know why he was not caught, General.”</p>
				<p>“No, I do not.”</p>
				<p>“Because it was the black wolf that belonged to old Thibault, the sabot-maker.”</p>
				<p>“It could not have been Thibault’s black wolf, for you said yourself just this moment that the wolf that used to come and kill <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Destournelles’ sheep was a grey one.”</p>
				<p>“He is grey now, General; but thirty years ago, when Thibault the sabot-maker was alive, he was black; and, to assure you of the truth of this, look at my hair, which was black as a raven’s thirty years ago, and now is as grey as the Doctor’s.”</p>
				<p>The Doctor was a cat, an animal of some fame, that you will find mentioned in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires</i> and known as the Doctor on account of the magnificent fur which nature had given it for a coat.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” replied my father, “I know your tale about Thibault, the sabot-maker; but, if the black wolf is the devil, Mocquet, as you say he is, he would not change colour.”</p>
				<p>“Not at all, General; only it takes him a hundred years to become quite white, and the last midnight of every hundred years, he turns black as a coal again.”</p>
				<p>“I give up the case, then, Mocquet: all I ask is, that you will not tell my son this fine tale of yours, until he is fifteen at least.”</p>
				<p>“And why, General?”</p>
				<p>“Because it is no use stuffing his mind with nonsense of that kind, until he is old enough to laugh at wolves, whether they are white, grey or black.”</p>
				<p>“It shall be as you say, General; he shall hear nothing of this matter.”</p>
				<p>“Go on, then.”</p>
				<p>“Where had we got to, General?”</p>
				<p>“We had got to your <em>trarp</em>, which you had put on your stomach, and you were saying that it was a first-rate <em>trarp</em>.”</p>
				<p>“By my faith, General, that was a first-rate <em>trarp</em>!” It weighed a good ten pounds. What am I saying! fifteen pounds at least with its chain!</p>
				<p>I put the chain over my wrist.</p>
				<p>“And what happened that night?”</p>
				<p>“That night? why, it was worse than ever! Generally, it was in her leather overshoes she came and kneaded my chest, but that night she came in her wooden sabots.”</p>
				<p>“And she comes like this⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
				<p>“Every blessed one of God’s nights, and it is making me quite thin; you can see for yourself, General, I am growing as thin as a lath. However, this morning I made up my mind.”</p>
				<p>“And what did you decide upon, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Well, then, I made up my mind I would let fly at her with my gun.”</p>
				<p>“That was a wise decision to come to. And when do you think of carrying it out?”</p>
				<p>“This evening, or tomorrow at latest, General.”</p>
				<p>“Confound it! And just as I was wanting to send you over to Villers-Hellon.”</p>
				<p>“That won’t matter, General. Was it something that you wanted done at once?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, at once.”</p>
				<p>“Very well, then, I can go over to Villers-Hellon⁠—it’s not above a few miles, if I go through the wood⁠—and get back here this evening; the journey both ways is only twenty-four miles, and we have covered a few more than that before now out shooting, General.”</p>
				<p>“That’s settled, then; I will write a letter for you to give to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Collard, and then you can start.”</p>
				<p>“I will start, General, without a moment’s delay.”</p>
				<p>My father rose, and wrote to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Collard; the letter was as follows:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender">“My dear Collard,</p>
					<p>“I am sending you that idiot of a keeper of mine, whom you know; he has taken into his head that an old woman <em>nightmares</em> him every night, and, to rid himself of this vampire, he intends nothing more nor less than to kill her.</p>
					<p>“Justice, however, might not look favourably on this method of his for curing himself of indigestion, and so I am going to start him off to you on a pretext of some kind or other. Will you, also, on some pretext or other, send him on, as soon as he gets to you, to Danré, at Vouty, who will send him on to Dulauloy, who, with or without pretext, may then, as far as I care, send him on to the devil?</p>
					<p>“In short, he must be kept going for a fortnight at least. By that time we shall have moved out of here and shall be at Antilly, and as he will then no longer be in the district of Haramont, and as his nightmare will probably have left him on the way, Mother Durand will be able to sleep in peace, which I should certainly not advise her to do if Mocquet were remaining anywhere in her neighbourhood.</p>
					<p>“He is bringing you six brace of snipe and a hare, which we shot while out yesterday on the marshes of Vallue.</p>
					<p>“A thousand-and-one of my tenderest remembrances to the fair Herminie, and as many kisses to the dear little Caroline.</p>
					<footer>
						<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your friend</span>,<br/>
						“<b epub:type="z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Alex.</abbr> Dumas</b>.”</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>An hour later Mocquet was on his way, and, at the end of three weeks, he rejoined us at Antilly.</p>
				<p>“Well,” asked my father, seeing him reappear in robust health, “well, and how about Mother Durand?”</p>
				<p>“Well, General,” replied Mocquet cheerfully, “I’ve got rid of the old mole; it seems she has no power except in her own district.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>Twelve years had passed since Mocquet’s nightmare, and I was now over fifteen years of age. It was the winter of 1817 to 1818; ten years before that date I had, alas! lost my father.</p>
				<p>We no longer had a Pierre for gardener, a Hippolyte for valet, or a Mocquet for keeper; we no longer lived at the Château of Les Fossés or in the villa at Antilly, but in the marketplace of Villers Cotterets, in a little house opposite the fountain, where my mother kept a <i xml:lang="fr">bureau de tabac</i>, selling powder and shot as well over the same counter.</p>
				<p>As you have already read in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires</i>, although still young, I was an enthusiastic sportsman. As far as sport went, however, that is according to the usual acceptation of the word, I had none, except when my cousin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Deviolaine, the ranger of the forest at Villers-Cotterets, was kind enough to ask leave of my mother to take me with him. I filled up the remainder of my time with poaching.</p>
				<p>For this double function of sportsman and poacher I was well provided with a delightful single-barrelled gun, on which was engraven the monogram of the Princess Borghese, to whom it had originally belonged. My father had given it me when I was a child, and when, after his death, everything had to be sold, I implored so urgently to be allowed to keep my gun, that it was not sold with the other weapons, and the horses and carriages.</p>
				<p>The most enjoyable time for me was the winter; then the snow lay on the ground, and the birds, in their search for food, were ready to come wherever grain was sprinkled for them. Some of my father’s old friends had fine gardens, and I was at liberty to go and shoot the birds there as I liked. So I used to sweep the snow away, spread some grain, and, hiding myself within easy gunshot, fire at the birds, sometimes killing six, eight, or even ten at a time.</p>
				<p>Then, if the snow lasted, there was another thing to look forward to⁠—the chance of tracing a wolf to its lair, and a wolf so traced was everybody’s property. The wolf, being a public enemy, a murderer beyond the pale of the law, might be shot at by all or anyone, and so, in spite of my mother’s cries, who dreaded the double danger for me, you need not ask if I seized my gun, and was first on the spot ready for sport.</p>
				<p>The winter of 1817 to 1818 had been long and severe; the snow was lying a foot deep on the ground, and so hard frozen that it had held for a fortnight past, and still there were no tidings of anything.</p>
				<p>Towards four o’clock one afternoon Mocquet called upon us; he had come to lay in his stock of powder. While so doing, he looked at me and winked with one eye. When he went out, I followed.</p>
				<p>“What is it, Mocquet?” I asked, “tell me.”</p>
				<p>“Can’t you guess, Monsieur Alexandre?”</p>
				<p>“No, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t guess, then, that if I come and buy powder here from Madame, your mother, instead of going to Haramont for it⁠—in short, if I walk three miles instead of only a quarter that distance, that I might possibly have a bit of a shoot to propose to you?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, you good Mocquet! and what and where?”</p>
				<p>“There’s a wolf, Monsieur Alexandre.”</p>
				<p>“Not really?”</p>
				<p>“He carried off one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Destournelles’ sheep last night, I have traced him to the Tillet woods.”</p>
				<p>“And what then?”</p>
				<p>“Why then, I am certain to see him again tonight, and shall find out where his lair is, and tomorrow morning we’ll finish his business for him.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, this is luck!”</p>
				<p>“Only, we must first ask leave.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Of whom, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Leave of Madame.”</p>
				<p>“All right, come in, then, we will ask her at once.”</p>
				<p>My mother had been watching us through the window; she suspected that some plot was hatching between us.</p>
				<p>“I have no patience with you, Mocquet,” she said, as we went in, “you have no sense or discretion.”</p>
				<p>“In what way, Madame?” asked Mocquet.</p>
				<p>“To go exciting him in the way you do; he thinks too much of sport as it is.”</p>
				<p>“Nay, Madame, it is with him, as with dogs of breed; his father was a sportsman, he is a sportsman, and his son will be a sportsman after him; you must make up your mind to that.”</p>
				<p>“And supposing some harm should come to him?”</p>
				<p>“Harm come to him with me? With Mocquet? No, indeed! I will answer for it with my own life, that he shall be safe. Harm happen to him, to him, the General’s son? Never, never, never!”</p>
				<p>But my poor mother shook her head; I went to her and flung my arms round her neck.</p>
				<p>“Mother, dearest,” I cried, “please let me go.”</p>
				<p>“You will load his gun for him, then, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Have no fear, sixty grains of powder, not a grain more or less, and a twenty to the pound bullet.”</p>
				<p>“And you will not leave him?”</p>
				<p>“I will stay by him like his shadow.”</p>
				<p>“You will keep him near you?”</p>
				<p>“Between my legs.”</p>
				<p>“I give him into your sole charge, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“And he shall be given back to you safe and sound. Now, Monsieur Alexandre, gather up your traps, and let us be off; your mother has given her permission.”</p>
				<p>“You are not taking him away this evening, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“I must, Madame, tomorrow morning will be too late to fetch him; we must hunt the wolf at dawn.”</p>
				<p>“The wolf! it is for a wolf-hunt that you are asking for him to go with you?”</p>
				<p>“Are you afraid that the wolf will eat him?”</p>
				<p>“Mocquet! Mocquet!”</p>
				<p>“But when I tell you that I will be answerable for everything!”</p>
				<p>“And where will the poor child sleep?”</p>
				<p>“With father Mocquet, of course, he will have a good mattress laid on the floor, and sheets white as those which God has spread over the fields, and two good warm coverlids; I promise you that he shall not catch cold.”</p>
				<p>“I shall be all right, mother, you may be sure! Now then, Mocquet, I am ready.”</p>
				<p>“And you don’t even give me a kiss, you poor boy, you!”</p>
				<p>“Indeed, yes, dear mother, and a good many more than one!”</p>
				<p>And I threw myself on my mother’s neck, stifling her with my caresses as I clasped her in my arms.</p>
				<p>“And when shall I see you again?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, do not be uneasy if he does not return before tomorrow evening.”</p>
				<p>“How, tomorrow evening! and you spoke of starting at dawn!”</p>
				<p>“At dawn for the wolf; but if we miss him, the lad must have a shot or two at the wild ducks on the marshes of Vallue.”</p>
				<p>“I see! you are going to drown him for me!”</p>
				<p>“By the name of all that’s good, Madame, if I was not speaking to the General’s widow⁠—I should say⁠—”</p>
				<p>“What Mocquet? What would you say?”</p>
				<p>“That you will make nothing but a wretched milksop of your boy.⁠ ⁠… If the General’s mother had been always behind him, pulling at his coattails, as you are behind this child, he would never even have had the courage to cross the sea to France.”</p>
				<p>“You are right, Mocquet! take him away! I am a poor fool.”</p>
				<p>And my mother turned aside, to wipe away a tear.</p>
				<p>A mother’s tear, that heart’s diamond, more precious than all the pearls of Ophir! I saw it running down her cheek. I ran to the poor woman, and whispered to her, “Mother, if you like, I will stay at home.”</p>
				<p>“No, no, go, my child,” she said, “Mocquet is right; you must, sooner or later, learn to be a man.”</p>
				<p>I gave her another last kiss; then I ran after Mocquet, who had already started.</p>
				<p>After I had gone a few paces, I looked round; my mother had run into the middle of the road, that she might keep me in sight as long as possible; it was my turn now to wipe away a tear.</p>
				<p>“How now?” said Mocquet, “you crying too, Monsieur Alexandre!”</p>
				<p>“Nonsense, Mocquet! it’s only the cold makes my eyes run.”</p>
				<p>But Thou, O God, who gavest me that tear, Thou knowest that it was not because of the cold that I was crying.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>It was pitch dark when we reached Mocquet’s house. We had a savoury omelette and stewed rabbit for supper, and then Mocquet made my bed ready for me. He kept his word to my mother, for I had a good mattress, two white sheets and two good warm coverlids.</p>
				<p>“Now,” said Mocquet, “tuck yourself in there, and go to sleep; we may probably have to be off at four o’clock tomorrow morning.”</p>
				<p>“At any hour you like, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I know, you are a capital riser over night, and tomorrow morning I shall have to throw a jug of cold water over you to make you get up.”</p>
				<p>“You are welcome to do that, Mocquet, if you have to call me twice.”</p>
				<p>“Well, we’ll see about that.”</p>
				<p>“Are you in a hurry to go to sleep, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Why, whatever do you want me to do at this hour of the night?”</p>
				<p>“I thought, perhaps, Mocquet, you would tell me one of those stories that I used to find so amusing when I was a child.”</p>
				<p>“And who is going to get up for me at two o’clock tomorrow, if I sit telling you tales till midnight? Our good priest, perhaps?”</p>
				<p>“You are right, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“It’s fortunate you think so!”</p>
				<p>So I undressed and went to bed. Five minutes later Mocquet was snoring like a bass viol.</p>
				<p>I turned and twisted for a good two hours before I could get to sleep. How many sleepless nights have I not passed on the eve of the first shoot of the season! At last, towards midnight fatigue gained the mastery over me. A sudden sensation of cold awoke me with a start at four o’clock in the morning; I opened my eyes. Mocquet had thrown my bedclothes off over the foot of the bed, and was standing beside me, leaning both hands on his gun, his face beaming out upon me, as, at every fresh puff of his short pipe, the light from it illuminated his features.</p>
				<p>“Well, how have you got on, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“He has been tracked to his lair.”</p>
				<p>“The wolf? and who tracked him?”</p>
				<p>“This foolish old Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“Bravo!”</p>
				<p>“But guess where he has chosen to take covert, this most accommodating of good wolves!”</p>
				<p>“Where was it then, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“If I gave you a hundred chances you wouldn’t guess! in the Three Oaks Covert.”</p>
				<p>“We’ve got him, then?”</p>
				<p>“I should rather think so.”</p>
				<p>The Three Oaks Covert is a patch of trees and undergrowth, about two acres in extent, situated in the middle of the plain of Largny, about five hundred paces from the forest.</p>
				<p>“And the keepers?” I went on.</p>
				<p>“All had notice sent them,” replied Mocquet; “Moynat, Mildet, Vatrin, Lafeuille, all the best shots in short, are waiting in readiness just outside the forest. You and I, with Monsieur Charpentier, from Vallue, Monsieur Hochedez, from Largny, Monsieur Destournelles, from Les Fossés, are to surround the Covert; the dogs will be slipped, the field-keeper will go with them, and we shall have him, that’s certain.”</p>
				<p>“You’ll put me in a good place, Mocquet?”</p>
				<p>“Haven’t I said that you will be near me; but you must get up first.”</p>
				<p>“That’s true⁠—Brrou!”</p>
				<p>“And I am going to have pity on your youth and put a bundle of wood in the fireplace.”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t dare ask for it; but, on my word of honour, it will be kind of you if you will.”</p>
				<p>Mocquet went out and brought in an armful of wood from the timber-yard, and threw it on to the hearth, poking it down with his foot; then he threw a lighted match among the twigs, and in another moment the clear bright flames were dancing and crackling up the chimney. I went and sat on the stool by the fireside, and there dressed myself; you may be sure that I was not long over my toilette; even Mocquet was astonished at my celerity.</p>
				<p>“Now, then,” he said, “a drop of this, and then off!” And saying this, he filled two small glasses with a yellowish coloured liquor, which did not require any tasting on my part to recognize.</p>
				<p>“You know I never drink brandy, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, you are your father’s son, all over! What will you have, then?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing, Mocquet, nothing.”</p>
				<p>“You know the proverb: ‘Leave the house empty; the devil will be there.’ Believe me, you had better put something into your stomach, while I load your gun, for I must keep my promise to that poor mother of yours.”</p>
				<p>“Well, then, I will have a crust of bread and a glass of <i xml:lang="fr">pignolet</i>.” <i xml:lang="fr">Pignolet</i> is a light wine made in non-winegrowing districts, generally said to require three men to drink it, one to drink, and two to hold him; I was, however, pretty well accustomed to <i xml:lang="fr">pignolet</i>, and could drink it up without help. So I swallowed my glass of wine while Mocquet loaded my gun.</p>
				<p>“What are you doing, Mocquet?” I asked him.</p>
				<p>“Making a cross on your bullet,” he replied. “As you will be near me, we shall probably let fly together, and, although I know you would give me up your share, still, for the glory of it, it will be as well to know which of us killed him, if the wolf falls. So, mind you aim straight.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll do my best, Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“Here’s your gun, then, loaded for bird-shooting; and now, gun over your shoulder, and off we start.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>The meeting-place was on the road leading to Chavigny. Here we found the keepers and some of the huntsmen, and within another ten minutes those who were missing had also joined us. Before five o’clock struck, our number was complete, and then we held a council of war to decide our further proceedings. It was finally arranged that we should first take up our position round the Three Oaks Covert at some considerable distance from it, and then gradually advance so as to form a cordon round it. Everything was to be done with the utmost silence, it being well known that wolves decamp on hearing the slightest noise. Each of us was ordered to look carefully along the path he followed, to make quite sure that the wolf had not left the covert. Meanwhile the field-keeper was holding Mocquet’s hounds in leash.</p>
				<p>One by one we took our stand facing the covert, on the spot to which our particular path had conducted us. As it happened, Mocquet and I found ourselves on the north side of the warren, which was parallel with the forest.</p>
				<p>Mocquet had rightly said that we should be in the best place, for the wolf would in all probability try and make for the forest, and so would break covert on our side of it.</p>
				<p>We took our stand, each in front of an oak tree, fifty paces apart from one another, and then we waited, without moving, and hardly daring to breathe. The dogs on the farther side of the warren were now uncoupled; they gave two short barks, and were then silent. The keeper followed them into the covert, calling halloo as he beat the trees with his stick. But the dogs, their eyes starting out of their heads, their lips drawn back, and their coats bristling, remained as if nailed to the ground. Nothing would induce them to move a step further.</p>
				<p>“Halloa, Mocquet!” cried the keeper, “this wolf of yours must be an extra plucky one, Rocador and Tombelle refuse to tackle him.”</p>
				<p>But Mocquet was too wise to make any answer, for the sound of his voice would have warned the wolf that there were enemies in that direction.</p>
				<p>The keeper went forward, still beating the trees, the two dogs after him cautiously advancing step by step, without a bark, only now and then giving a low growl.</p>
				<p>All of a sudden there was a loud exclamation from the keeper, who called out, “I nearly trod on his tail! the wolf! the wolf! Look out, Mocquet, look out!”</p>
				<p>And at that moment something came rushing towards us, and the animal leapt out of the covert, passing between us like a flash of lightning. It was an enormous wolf, nearly white with age. Mocquet turned and sent two bullets after him; I saw them bound and rebound along the snow.</p>
				<p>“Shoot, shoot!” he called out to me.</p>
				<p>Only then did I bring my gun to the shoulder; I took aim, and fired; the wolf made a movement as if he wanted to bite his shoulder.</p>
				<p>“We have him! we have him!” cried Mocquet, “the lad has hit his mark! Success to the innocent!”</p>
				<p>But the wolf ran on, making straight for Moynat and Mildet, the two best shots in the country round.</p>
				<p>Both their first shots were fired at him in the open; the second, after he had entered the forest.</p>
				<p>The two first bullets were seen to cross one another, and ran along the ground, sending up spurts of snow; the wolf had escaped them both, but he had no doubt been struck down by the others; that the two keepers who had just fired should miss their aim, was an unheard of thing. I had seen Moynat kill seventeen snipe one after the other; I had seen Mildet cut a squirrel in two as he was jumping from tree to tree.</p>
				<p>The keepers went into the forest after the wolf; we looked anxiously towards the spot where they had disappeared. We saw them reappear, dejected, and shaking their heads.</p>
				<p>“Well?” cried Mocquet interrogatively.</p>
				<p>“Bah!” answered Mildet, with an impatient movement of his arm, “he’s at Taille-Fontaine by this time.”</p>
				<p>“At Taille-Fontaine!” exclaimed Mocquet, completely taken aback. “What! the fools have gone and missed him, then!”</p>
				<p>“Well, what of that? you missed him yourself, did you not?”</p>
				<p>Mocquet shook his head.</p>
				<p>“Well, well, there’s some devilry about this,” he said. “That I should miss him was surprising, but it was perhaps possible; but that Moynat should have shot twice and missed him is not possible, no, I say, no.”</p>
				<p>“Nevertheless, so it is, my good Mocquet.”</p>
				<p>“Besides, you, you hit him,” he said to me.</p>
				<p>“I!⁠ ⁠… are you sure?”</p>
				<p>“We others may well be ashamed to say it. But as sure as my name is Mocquet, you hit the wolf.”</p>
				<p>“Well, it’s easy to find out if I did hit him, there would be blood on the snow.⁠—Come, Mocquet, let us run and see.” And suiting the action to the word, I set off running.</p>
				<p>“Stop, stop, do not run, whatever you do,” cried Mocquet, clenching his teeth and stamping. “We must go quietly, until we know better what we have to deal with.”</p>
				<p>“Well, we will go quietly, then; but at any rate, let us go!”</p>
				<p>Mocquet then began to follow the wolf’s track, step by step.</p>
				<p>“There’s not much fear of losing it,” I said.</p>
				<p>“It’s plain enough.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but that’s not what I am looking for.”</p>
				<p>“What are you looking for, then?”</p>
				<p>“You will know in a minute or two.”</p>
				<p>The other huntsmen had now joined us, and as they came along after us, the keeper related to them what had taken place. Meanwhile, Mocquet and I continued to follow the wolf’s footprints, which were deeply indented in the snow. At last we came to the spot where he had received my fire.</p>
				<p>“There, Mocquet,” I said to him, “you see I did miss him after all!”</p>
				<p>“How do you know that you missed him?”</p>
				<p>“Because there are no blood marks.”</p>
				<p>“Look for the mark of your bullet, then, in the snow.”</p>
				<p>I looked to see which way my bullet would have sped if it had not hit the wolf, and then went in that direction; but I tracked for more than a quarter of a mile to no purpose, so I thought I might as well go back to Mocquet. He beckoned to the keepers to approach, and then turning to me, said:⁠—</p>
				<p>“Well, and the bullet?”</p>
				<p>“I cannot find it.”</p>
				<p>“I have been luckier than you, then, for I have found it.”</p>
				<p>“What, you found it?”</p>
				<p>“Right about and come behind me.”</p>
				<p>I did as I was told, and the huntsmen having come up, Mocquet pointed out a line to them beyond which they were not to pass. The keepers Mildet and Moynat now joined us. “Well?” said Mocquet to them in their turn.</p>
				<p>“Missed,” they both answered at once.</p>
				<p>“I saw you had missed him in the open, but when he had reached covert⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
				<p>“Missed him there too.”</p>
				<p>“Are you sure?”</p>
				<p>“Both the bullets have been found, each of them in the trunk of a tree.”</p>
				<p>“It is almost past belief,” said Vatrin.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” rejoined Mocquet, “it is almost past belief, but I have something to show you which is even more difficult to believe.”</p>
				<p>“Show it us, then.”</p>
				<p>“Look there, what do you see on the snow?”</p>
				<p>“The track of a wolf; what of that?”</p>
				<p>“And close to the mark of the right foot⁠—there⁠—what do you see?”</p>
				<p>“A little hole.”</p>
				<p>“Well, do you understand?”</p>
				<p>The keepers looked at each other in astonishment.</p>
				<p>“Do you understand now?” repeated Mocquet.</p>
				<p>“The thing’s impossible!” exclaimed the keepers.</p>
				<p>“Nevertheless it is so, and I will prove it to you.”</p>
				<p>And so saying, Mocquet plunged his hand into the snow, felt about a moment or two, and then, with a cry of triumph, pulled out a flattened bullet.</p>
				<p>“Why, that’s my bullet,” I said.</p>
				<p>“You recognise it, then?”</p>
				<p>“Of course I do, you marked it for me.”</p>
				<p>“And what mark did I put on it?”</p>
				<p>“A cross.”</p>
				<p>“You see, sirs,” said Mocquet.</p>
				<p>“Yes, but explain how this happened.”</p>
				<p>“This is it; he could turn aside the ordinary bullets, but he had no power over the youngster’s, which was marked with a cross; it hit him in the shoulder, I saw him make a movement as if to try and bite himself.”</p>
				<p>“But,” I broke in, astonished at the silence and amazement which had fallen on the keepers, “if my bullet hit him in the shoulder, why did it not kill him?”</p>
				<p>“Because it was made neither of gold nor of silver, my dear boy; and because no bullets but those that are made of gold or silver can pierce the skin of the devil, or kill those who have made a compact with him.”</p>
				<p>“But, Mocquet,” said the keepers, shuddering, “do you really think⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
				<p>“Think? Yes, I do! I could swear that we have had to do this morning with Thibault, the sabot-maker’s wolf.”</p>
				<p>The huntsman and keepers looked at one another; two or three of them made the sign of the cross; and they all appeared to share Mocquet’s opinion, and to know quite well what he meant by Thibault’s wolf. I, alone, knew nothing about it, and therefore asked impatiently, “What is this wolf, and who is this Thibault, the sabot-maker?”</p>
				<p>Mocquet hesitated before replying, then, “Ah! to be sure!” he exclaimed, “the General told me that I might let you know about it when you were fifteen. You are that age now, are you not?”</p>
				<p>“I am sixteen,” I replied with some pride.</p>
				<p>“Well, then, my dear Monsieur Alexandre, Thibault, the sabot-maker’s wolf, is the devil. You were asking me last night for a tale, were you not?”</p>
				<p>“Yes.”</p>
				<p>“Come back home with me this morning, then, and I will tell you a tale, and a fine one too.”</p>
				<p>The keepers and huntsmen shook hands with one another in silence and separated, each going his own way; I went back with Mocquet, who then told me the tale which you shall now hear.</p>
				<p>Perhaps you will ask me why, having heard it so long ago, I have not told it before. I can only answer you by saying it has remained hidden away in a drawer of my memory, which has remained closed ever since, and which I only opened again three days ago. I would tell you what induced me to do this, but you might, I fear, find the recital somewhat tedious, and as it would take time, I prefer starting at once upon my tale.</p>
				<p>I say my tale; I ought perhaps to call it Mocquet’s tale⁠—but, upon my word! when you have been sitting on an egg for thirty-eight years, you may be excused for coming to believe at last that you’ve laid it yourself!</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
